Live speech mouth integration — 2026-10-09

Checkpoint before integration: 651a4c4.
Purpose: put the selected mouth vocabulary into real speech for Avi's visual review.
Choices: UH-b, OU-d (OO sound), RR-d, simple unrounded CH (h .6, square .3).
Both the editable lab and speech start from fresh copies of the same vocabulary.
All eight channels now reach the existing speech smoother and renderer. Neutral
speech input remains w 1 / h 1; the lab's explicit REST preset retains h 0.

The previous individual-letter rounding is replaced by a small English
word/digraph approximation using existing character alignment. Touch, duck and
much stay unrounded; moon/food/too use OU; Rome/roam use OH to OH_END.
This is not phoneme recognition or forced alignment. Unfamiliar words, accents
and spelling exceptions can still be approximate. Assess natural conversation
before adding more rules. No acoustic model or service was added.

PASS — 13 focused automated checks, including actual voice streaming,
interruption, replacement replies, gaps, closure, neutral return, split tags,
split vowel/digraph arrival and stable event order.
Command: node --test scripts/mouth-study/speech-mouth.test.mjs scripts/mouth-study/voice-mouth.test.mjs

PASS — One real capture replay in Safari 26.6.2 through the production speech,
replay and rendering path, with temporary read-only instrumentation. The latest
local capture's Reply 6 supplied 18.72 seconds of audio. 949 rendered frames;
946 audible frames; every channel finite; sculpted channels reached the renderer.
Sampled Duck and Touch windows had round=0/cup=0. The Moon window reached
round/cup .983. Held lab preview stayed suspended. Natural completion returned
all channels exactly to neutral and the speech envelope to zero. No browser
errors or warnings. Numeric evidence: docs/live-mouth-validation.json.
No new external live conversation was started; the updated local live page is
ready for Avi to connect and judge. No performance benchmark was run this pass.

Only js/voice.js, mouth defaults in js/stage.js and new js/speech-mouth.js changed
in production. Other existing JS files hash-identical to the checkpoint.
Face geometry, eyes, brows, head motion, trails, colour, audio scheduling and
expression cues were not edited. Baseline QA fingerprinting was adjusted to use
the baseline's own file list, because it predates the new helper module.
Private capture text/audio remains local and absent from this report and commit.
