Mouth articulation and timing refinement — 2026-10-10

Approved starting point: a53f1f8.
Saved as checkpoint/approved-live-before-mouth-refinement-2026-10-10.
The approved state was already committed and clean; no empty commit was needed.
Refinement code: 71f5632. Avi approved the mouth refinement on 2026-10-10.
Approved checkpoint: checkpoint/approved-mouth-articulation-2026-10-10.

Production scope: js/speech-mouth.js and js/voice.js only.
Existing eight-channel shape presets, opening strength and mouth geometry remain
unchanged. Eyes, expression mappings, head/body movement, audio scheduling,
provider configuration and character prompt are unchanged.

Pronunciation remains a bounded English spelling approximation. Common long I
(time, like, my, I and contractions, igh) and long A (face, make, ai/ay, they,
eight/great) now travel between existing shapes. Simple silent-e patterns exclude
give/live/have and do not broadly match multisyllabic endings such as service,
machine or promise. A few common EE and OW words, soft C and initial silent KN/WR
also have corrected choices. Split apostrophes no longer produce a neutral reset.
This is not acoustic phoneme recognition; accents and unfamiliar words remain
approximate. No dependencies, dictionaries, services or generated speech added.

Timing: remove the fixed 70 ms lip-closure hold that carried delays through later
sounds. Keep valid supplied timestamps. Anticipation takes at most 30 ms: closures
can borrow half the preceding interval while leaving 34 ms when available, so a
brief M after a changing vowel remains visible at 30 Hz. Other shapes borrow a
quarter, retaining 40 ms when available. No following target is pushed later.
Shape smoothing responds to target duration
(18–45 ms), with fast closure attack (4–12 ms) and the existing 12 ms release.
The original audio envelope attack/release, neutral return, gaps and interruption
handling remain intact. Already-emitted streaming phases retain their start times.

PASS: 262 JavaScript tests, including the existing facial and movement suite.
Focused cases cover short vowels, spelling exceptions, split tags/contractions,
stable streamed phases, malformed overlapping alignment, quick initial/repeated
closures and vowel visibility at 30/60/120 Hz with four frame offsets.
Command: node --test scripts/*.test.mjs scripts/mouth-study/*.test.mjs

PASS: offline comparison through the actual old/new createVoice drivers using
four existing cached recordings decoded locally: intro, lab-press, lab-wide and
lab-fast. Cached and streamed playback at 30/60/120 Hz: 48 runs, 22,744 frames.
All eight channels finite and every run returns exactly to neutral. Cached audio
envelopes and expression cues are identical before/after. Streaming target
sequences/timestamps agree with their cached equivalents. Displayed frames
overlapping all 15 aligned lip-closure intervals across the
four clips exceed 85% closure at 30/60/120 Hz in both cached and streamed refined
playback. Old fixed-hold delays reach 50 ms (intro), 30 ms (lab-press) and 46 ms
(lab-fast); refined target timestamps have zero added delay. Web Audio clocks and
the output effect are stubbed for this numerical check; this is not a browser
performance benchmark or proof of artistic improvement.
Numeric results: docs/mouth-articulation-validation.json.

Visual review used a temporary loopback-only before/after comparison with
identical cached speech and the approved face, without a provider or microphone.
Avi approved the result and requested that the completed work be committed
and pushed on 2026-10-10.

PASS: browser playback through the production face renderer. Approved/refined
lab-press cached comparison and refined lab-fast simulated streaming completed:
2,634 rendered speech frames, no nonfinite mouth values, no console errors or
warnings. The streamed run delivered 15 audio chunks with zero underruns and
zero sample seams; cached/streamed shapes match, timing difference below 1e-9 ms.
Browser controls recovered after an initial tooling timeout. Rendered output
was spot-checked, and Avi subsequently approved the visual result.
